# Compiler I - Syntax Analysis

https://www.nand2tetris.org/project10

------

## Background

The *Jack* compiler, like those of Java and C#, is two-tiered: the compiler's front-end translates from the high-level language to an intermediate VM language; the compiler's back-end translates further from the VM language to the native code of the host platform. In *Projects 7-8* we've built the compiler's back-end (the VM translator); we now turn to building the compiler's front-end. This development will span two projects: syntax analysis (this project), and code generation (next project). Welcome to syntax analysis.

## Objective

In this project we build a syntax analyzer that parses *Jack* programs according to the *Jack* grammar, producing an XML file that renders the program's structure using marked-up text. In the next project, the logic that generates the XML output will be morphed into logic that generates VM code.

## Contract

Write a syntax analyzer for the *Jack* language. Use it to parse all the `.jack` class files supplied below. For each input `.jack` file, your analyzer should generate an `.xml` output file. The generated files should be identical to the supplied compare-files, up to white space.

## Resources

The relevant reading for this project is book *Chapter 10*. You will need two tools: the programming language with which you will implement your syntax analyzer, and the supplied *Text Comparer* utility, available in your `nand2tetris/tools` directory. This program will help you compare the output files generated by your syntax analyzer to the compare files supplied by us. You may also want to inspect the generated and supplied output files visually, using some XML viewer. To do so, simply load these files into some web browser or text editor. Some of these tools, e.g. *Chrome*, are designed to display XML text nicely - give it a try. All the files necessary for this project are available in `nand2tetris/projects/10` on your computer.

## Proposed Implementation

*Chapter 10* includes a proposed, language-independent syntax analyzer API, which can serve as your implementation's blueprint. We propose implementing the syntax analyzer in two stages. First, write and test the `Tokenizer` module. Next, write and test the `CompilationEngine` module, which implements the parser described in the chapter.

**Stage I: Tokenizer**

Tokenizing, a basic service of any syntax analyzer, is the act of breaking a given textual input into a stream of tokens. And while it is at it, the tokenizer can also classify the tokens into lexical categories. With that in mind, your first task it to implement, and test, the `JackTokenizer` module specified in *Chapter 10*. Specifically, you have to develop (i) a *Tokenizer* implementation, and (ii) a test program that goes through a given input file (`.jack` file) and produces a stream of tokens using your *Tokenizer* implementation. Each token should be printed in a separate line, along with its classification: symbol, keyword, identifier, integer constant or string constant. Here is an example:

Source code (input):

```
if (x < 0) {
    let state = "negative";
}
```

Tokenizer output:

```xml
<tokens>
    <keyword> if </keyword>
    <symbol> ( </symbol>
    <identifier> x </identifier>
    <symbol> &lt; </symbol>
    <integerConstant> 0 </integerConstant>
    <symbol> ) </symbol>
    <symbol> { </symbol>
    <keyword> let </keyword>
    <identifier> state </identifier>
    <symbol> = </symbol>
    <stringConstant> negative </stringConstant>
    <symbol> ; </symbol>
    <symbol> } </symbol>
</tokens>
```

Note that in the case of string constants, the tokenizer throws away the double-quote characters. This behavior is intended, and is part of our tokenizer specification.

Also note that four of the symbols used in the *Jack* language (`<`, `>`, `"`, and `&`) are also used for XML markup, and thus they cannot appear verbatim as XML data. To solve the problem, and following convention, we require the tokenizer to output these tokens as `&lt;`, `&gt;`, `&quot;`, and `&amp;` respectively. For example, in order for the symbol "*less than*" to be displayed properly in a web browser, it should be generated as "`<symbol>&lt;</symbol>`".

Finally, note that unlike the `Tokeinizer` module, the tokenizer test program that you are to write is not part of the syntax analyzer. This test program entails an intermediate testing stage, focusing on unit-testing the `Tokenizer` only. Once this test is completed successfully, the test program is no longer necessary.

**Stage II: Parser (`CompilationEngine`)**

In the context of this project, parsing is defined narrowly as the act of going over the tokenized input and rendering its grammatical structure using some agreed-upon format. The specific parser that we implement here is based on the *Jack* grammar, and is designed to emit XML output. Both the grammar and the agreed-upon XML tags are described in *Chapter 10*.

The *Jack* parser is implemented by the `CompilationEngine` module, whose API is given in *Chapter 10*. Your task is to implement this API: write each one of the specified methods, and make sure that it emits the correct XML output. For the benefit of unit-testing, we recommend to begin by first writing a compilation engine that handles any given *Jack* code except for expressions; next, extend the compilation engine to handle expressions as well. The test programs supplied below are designed to support this staged testing strategy.

## Test Programs

A natural way to test your syntax analyzer it is to have it parse some representative *Jack* programs. We supply two such test programs: *Square Dance* and *Array Test*. The former includes all the syntactic features of the *Jack* language except for array processing, which appears in the latter. We also provide an expression-less version of the *Square Dance* program, as explained below.

**Square Dance:** a simple interactive application, described in *Project 9*. The implementation is organized in three classes:

| Source class file |                         Description                          | Tokenizer output  |  Parser output   |
| :---------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------: | :---------------: | :--------------: |
|    `Main.jack`    |   Initializes and starts a new "*square dance*" session".    |    `MainT.xml`    |    `Main.xml`    |
|   `Square.jack`   | Implements an animated square. A `Square` object has a screen location and size properties, and methods for drawing, erasing,moving, and size changing. |   `SquareT.xml`   |   `Square.xml`   |
| `SquareGame.jack` |          Runs the show according to the game rules.          | `SquareGameT.xml` | `SquareGame.xml` |

**Note:** The three source *Jack* files comprising the *Square Dance* application are identical to those stored in the `projects/09/Square` directory. For completeness, an identical copy of these files is also available in the `projects/10/Square` directory.

**Expressionless Square Dance:** in this version of *Square Dance*, each expression in the original source code has been replaced with a single identifier (some variable name in scope). This version of the program was designed in order to facilitate unit-testing of your syntax analyzer's ability to parse everything except for expressions. Note that the replacement of expressions with variables has resulted in nonsensical code which, however, is grammatically correct. For convenience, the expressionless files have the same names as those of the original files, but they are stored in a separate `projects/10/ExpressionlessSquare` directory.

**Array Test:** a single-class *Jack* program designed to test how the syntax analyzer handles array processing:

| Source class file |                         Description                          | Tokenizer output | Parser output |
| :---------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------: | :--------------: | :-----------: |
|    `Main.jack`    | Computes the average of a user-supplied sequence of integers using an array data structure and array manipulation commands. |   `MainT.xml`    |  `Main.xml`   |

**Experimenting with the test programs:** if you want, you can compile the supplied *Square Dance* and *Array Test* programs using the supplied *Jack Compiler*, then use the supplied *VM Emulator* to run the compiled code. This activity is irrelevant to the current project. However, it serves to show that the test programs are not just plain text; they also have semantics, or meaning, something that the syntax analyzer does not care about.

## Testing

Tokenizer Testing:

- Test your tokenizer on the *Square Dance* and the *Array Test* programs.
- For each `Xxx.jack` source file, have your tokenizer test program give the output file the name `XxxT.xml`. Apply your tokenizer test to each class file in the test programs, then use the supplied *Text Comparer* utility to compare the generated output to the supplied `.xml` compare files.
- Since the output files generated by your tokenizer test will have the same names and extensions as those of the supplied compare files, we suggest putting them in separate directories.

Parser Testing:

- Apply your syntax analyzer to the supplied test programs, then use the supplied *Text Comparer* utility to compare the generated output to the supplied `.xml` compare files.
- Since the output files generated by your syntax analyzer will have the same names and extensions as those of the supplied compare files, we suggest putting them in separate directories.
- Note that the indentation of the XML output is only for readability. Web browsers and the supplied *Text Comparer* ignore white space.

------

*© 2017 Shimon Schocken and Noam Nisan*